Noelle Reid
Professor Kalinowski
Data Mining
10 November 2024
Final Project Write Up

	Diabetes is a chronic medical condition characterized by a lack of or resistance to insulin, leading to fatigue, blurred vision, and other severe health complications. It affects approximately 37 million Americans, and to help identify the presence of diabetes, the overarching goal of this analysis was to accurately predict diabetic status. This was executed using K-means clustering to identify underlying patterns within the data, followed by a cross-validation analysis comparing logistic regression models to a decision tree. 
	The data was obtained from the 2015 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), a health-related survey conducted annually by the CDC. There were 253,680 responses from Americans, recording health-related behaviors, current chronic health problems, and the use of preventative strategies. Of the respondents, only about 14% have diabetes, while the rest are either not diabetic or prediabetic. After investigating the correlations between variables to avoid multicollinearity and redundancy in the analysis, none of the variables had a significantly strong correlation to one another. However, high blood pressure and age were moderately positively correlated, suggesting that as age increases, so does the risk of having high blood pressure.  A similar relationship was found between having high blood pressure and high cholesterol. There also appears to be a negative relationship between general health and high blood pressure, which is as expected. Within the data, those with high blood pressure had a much higher prevalence of diabetes than those without high blood pressure. The same was found for those with high cholesterol levels. There was not a significant difference in diabetic status based on sex as 13% of the women in the study were diabetics, as were 15% of the men. However, 24% of those with high blood pressure were diabetics, compared to only 6% of those without high blood pressure. 
	K-means clustering was implemented to group data points together based on their features, so that the points in each cluster were as similar as possible. The data was clustered twice based on a different selection of variables. The first group of variables centered around physical health and included variables such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol, smoker/not, and BMI. Two of the clusters had relatively similar characteristics, and diabetes status was not captured very well from this grouping. The second grouping based on personal demographics was slightly better as it accounted for sex, age, income, education, etc. The groups were even more different among themselves, and we found a negative relationship between income and general health. Also, the cluster with a higher percentage of diabetics had on average, lower general health. Overall, while K-means clustering was helpful, we were not able to uncover many other underlying patterns within the data. 
	In terms of predicting diabetic status, two logistic regression models and one decision tree were built. The multinomial regression was able to group diabetics, prediabetics, and those with no diabetes with 85% accuracy. In comparison, the bivariate model whose outcome is either diabetic or not diabetic, was able to classify the data with 87% accuracy. After tuning the hyperparameters of the decision tree to find the best model, it produced an accuracy of about 87%. However, this model has a depth of 7, which has a low interpretability. After cross-validating, the bivariate logistic regression model and decision tree were very comparable, with the decision tree proving to have higher accuracy and lower standard deviation. 
	From the correlation analysis, we can conclude that as age increases, so does the risk of having high blood pressure. While the dataset was not optimal for clustering as two of the clusters were always very similar, we found there is a negative relationship between income and general health that can be further explored to determine how wealth impacts disease prevalence. We can use this relationship to better help those who may not be able to afford health care and prevent diabetes as a result. After cross-validating the classification models, the tuned decision tree was 87% accurate in predicting diabetic status. This model can be used on other datasets to help predict who may be at risk of having diabetes, aiding in early identification.  

